feat: remove Astro Studio references (#9509)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/astro-db.mdx

import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Astro DB is a fully-managed SQL database designed for the Astro ecosystem: develop locally in Astro and deploy to any libSQL-compatible database.

> Astro DB is a complete solution to configuring, developing and querying your data. A local database is created whenever you run `astro dev` to manage your data without the need for Docker or a network connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro DB is a complete solution to configuring, developing and querying your data. A local database is created in the `.astro` directory whenever you run `astro dev` to manage your data without the need for Docker or a network connection.
```
I wonder if we should not specify here or elsewhere that in development mode it is also a `.db`. But now that the location is specified, it remains easy for the user to check the format. So it may not be useful.

Reviewer 2: I think here is good! I'll commit it, and if anyone has further suggestion, they can suggest something else! 🙌

> Astro DB is a complete solution to configuring, developing and querying your data. A local database is created in the `.astro` directory whenever you run `astro dev` to manage your data without the need for Docker or a network connection.

Reviewer 3: We can state the exact path, it's constant
```suggestion
Astro DB is a complete solution to configuring, developing and querying your data. A local database is created in `.astro/content.db` whenever you run `astro dev` to manage your data without the need for Docker or a network connection.
```

import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> Astro DB is a fully-managed SQL database designed for the Astro ecosystem: develop locally in Astro and deploy to any [libSQL-compatible database](/en/guides/astro-db).

Author: oops, i copy pasted the intro from the integration page and forgot to remove the link!

Data in Astro DB is stored using SQL tables. Tables structure your data into rows and columns, where columns enforce the type of each row value.

Define your tables in your `db/config.ts` file by providing the structure of the data in your existing libSQL database, or the data you will collect in a new database. This will allow Astro to generate a TypeScript interface to query that table from your project. The result is full TypeScript support when you access your data with property autocompletion and type-checking.

> To configure a database table, import and use the `defineTable()` and `column` utilities from `astro:db`. Then, create a name (case-sensitive) for your table and define the type of data in each column.

Reviewer 4: Small nit pick

```diff
- Then, create a name (case-sensitive) for your table and define the type of data in each column.
+ Then, define a name (case-sensitive) for your table and the type of data in each column.
```

Author: idk why its not letting me apply the changes from github, lets try this
```suggestion
To configure a database table, import and use the `defineTable()` and `column` utilities from `astro:db`. Then, define a name (case-sensitive) for your table and the type of data in each column.
```

Author: it didnt list you as the co-author... oops sorry abt that!

Reviewer 4: No worries, I’m not super concerned about that haha

Data in Astro DB is stored using SQL tables. Tables structure your data into rows and columns, where columns enforce the type of each row value.

Define your tables in your `db/config.ts` file by providing the structure of the data in your existing libSQL database, or the data you will collect in a new database.

When you define a table, Astro will generate a TypeScript interface to query that table from your project. The result is full TypeScript support when you access your data with property autocompletion and type-checking.

To configure a database table, import and use the `defineTable()` and `column` utilities from `astro:db`.

> This example configures a `Comment` table with required text columns for `author` and `body`. Then, makes it available to your project through the `defineDb()` export.

Author: I agree, thanks for pointing it out! Will see what others think

> This example configures a `Comment` table with required text columns for `author` and `body`. Then, makes it available to your project through the `defineDb()` export.

Reviewer: Likewise, I think a tip would be helpful!

});
```

## Seed your database for development

In development, Astro will use your DB config to generate local types according to your schemas. These will be generated fresh from your seed file each time the dev server is started, and will allow you to query and work with the shape of your data with type safety and autocompletion.

> You will not have access to production data during development unless you [connect to a remote database](#connecting-to-remote-databases) during development. This protects your data while allowing you to test and develop with type-safety using simulated data.

Reviewer 2: OK, I will reword! 🫡

> You will not have access to production data during development unless you [connect to a remote database](#connecting-to-remote-databases) during development. This protects your data while allowing you to test and develop with type-safety using simulated data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will not have access to production data during development unless you [connect to a remote database](#connecting-to-remote-databases) during development. This protects your data while allowing you to test and develop with a working database with type-safety.
```

});
```

## Seed your database for development

> In development, Astro will use your DB config to generate local types according to your schemas. These will be generated fresh from your seed file each time the dev server is started, and will allow you to query and work with the shape of your data with type safety and autocompletion.

Reviewer 3: > each time the dev server is started

One subtle thing that I stumbled upon is exactly this. The dev DB is seeded every time the server starts, including live restarts.

So the entire DB is recreated and re-seeded any time you change the DB config, since that causes a restart.
But the DB is not re-seeded when you change the seed itself, since that is not used by the server runtime and as such doesn't cause a restart. Maybe it should tho 🤔

Author: Maybe it showld restart, but I think this goes out of the scope of the docs ahah. maybe we can modify the section like this
```suggestion
In development, Astro will use your DB config to generate local types according to your schemas. These will be generated fresh from your seed file each time the dev server is started or live reloads, and will allow you to query and work with the shape of your data with type safety and autocompletion.
```

Reviewer 3: The text is already correct, it doesn't re-seed on live reloads. I was just pointing out that changing the seed is not a restart.

Reviewer 4: Are we 100% sure about this behavior? I just changed one of my seeds and saved the file and `[astro:db]` "Seeded database" in the console

Here is a video demonstrating:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8d4aac04-4a2b-4eac-92b5-b4c7f91be858

You will not have access to production data during development unless you [seed from your remote database](#seed-from-your-remote-database). This protects your data while allowing you to test and develop with type-safety using simulated data.

> To seed development data for testing and debugging into your Astro project, create a `db/seed.ts` file. Import both the `db` object and any configured table from `astro:db`. Use the `db.insert()` function to provide an array of table row data objects. This development data should match the form of your database schema and production data.

Reviewer 3: > Use the `db.insert()` function to provide an array of table row data objects.

This sentence seems weird. And it is technically incorrect since the `insert()` function doesn't take any row data; those go into the `values()` function on the returned object.

Maybe we should be more generic:
```suggestion
To seed development data for testing and debugging into your Astro project, create a `db/seed.ts` file. Import both the `db` object and any configured table from `astro:db`. Use the `db` handle (the same as given to your application) to insert the initial data into the development DB. This development data should match the form of your database schema and production data.
```

});
```

## Seed your database for development

In development, Astro will use your DB config to generate local types according to your schemas. These will be generated fresh from your seed file each time the dev server is started, and will allow you to query and work with the shape of your data with type safety and autocompletion.

> You will not have access to production data during development unless you [seed from your remote database](#seed-from-your-remote-database). This protects your data while allowing you to test and develop with type-safety using simulated data.

Reviewer: Maybe the link can be removed. It seems that it is not recommended for the most novice since it involves a risk. More advanced users will know how to do it with the rest of the doc I think... But maybe I'm wrong. 😅 
```suggestion
You will not have access to production data during development unless you seed from your remote database. This protects your data while allowing you to test and develop with type-safety using simulated data.
```

Author: You are correct; this seems to be the appropriate course of action. Perhaps we should wait for the others so we can consider everyone's input.

Reviewer 2: **If** a similar section exists, just with a different title, then I would suggest updating the link to that new section slug. My reasoning is:

 "You won't be able to have X unless you do Y" leads to, "OK, yes, I want to do Y! How do I do that!" This is exactly where a link is helpful.

If you have restructured so that there is no comparable section, it's fine to remove the link. BUT, don't just remove the link to "fix links" because *I* can go in and address issues that are problems in e.g. other files. That's not a blocker here. Decide whether to leave a link in based on whether it is *helpful to the reader*!

Your development server will automatically restart your database whenever this file changes, regenerating your types and seeding your development data from `seed.ts`.

## Connecting a libSQL database for production

> Astro DB can connect to any libSQL server from any platform that exposes the libSQL remote protocol of the server, or can be self-hosted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Astro DB can connect to any local libSQL database or to any server that exposes the libSQL remote protocol, whether managed or self-hosted.
```

To connect Astro DB to a libSQL database, set the following environment variables:

> - `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`: the connection URL to your libSQL server

Reviewer 3: It might not be a server
```suggestion
- `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`: the connection URL to your libSQL DB
```

> - `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`: the auth token to your libSQL server

Reviewer 3: It isn't needed for local DBs (files and in-memory).
```suggestion
- `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`: the auth token to your libSQL server, if needed
```

Maybe it could be more detailed, I'm not sure.

Author: I agree that it could be more detailed, like "this isn't needed for local DBs"

Details of the libSQL connection (e.g. encryption key, replication, sync interval) can be configured as query parameters in the remote connection URL.

> For example, to have a local file work as an embedded replica to an encrypted libSQL server, you can set the following environment variables:

Reviewer 3: The encryption is for the local copy. Encryption for the server is set on the server.

```suggestion
For example, to have an encrypted local file work as an embedded replica to a libSQL server, you can set the following environment variables:
```

```dotenv title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=file://local-copy.db?encryptionKey=your-encryption-key&syncInterval=60&syncUrl=libsql%3A%2F%2Fyour.server.io
ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN=token-to-your-remote-url
```

<ReadMore>See all available [remote URL configuration options](#remote-url-configuration-options)</ReadMore>

### Deploy your project with a live connection

> You can deploy your Astro DB project with a live connection to your libSQL-compatible database. This is possible with any deployment platform using any static or server rendering mode.

Reviewer 3: > This is possible with any deployment platform using any static or server rendering mode.

Technically not true with libSQL yet. Non-Node runtimes like Cloudflare and Deno don't work for now when using DB on server-rendered routes.
But they will work as soon as I implement it. No pressure for me 😅

Author: Maybe we can create a info aside or something that tells the user exactly this

Configure your build command to connect to your libSQL-compatible database using the `--remote` flag. This example applies the flag to a `"build"` script in your project's `package.json`. If your deployment platform accepts a build command, ensure this is set to `npm run build`.

```json title="package.json" "--remote"
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "astro build --remote"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: It is worth pointing out somewhere around this section that `build --remote` uses the connection to the remote DB both locally during the build and on the server, so the environment variables have to be available in both.

This was simpler when using Studio because it used the local logged-in user from the CLI, so the token env var was only needed on the server.

### Seed from your remote database

By default, Astro will use a local database file whenever you run the `dev` or `build` commands. Tables are recreated from scratch when each command is run, and development seed data will be inserted.

To connect to your hosted remote database, you can add the `--remote` flag. Use this flag for production deploys to have both readable and writable access to your remote database. This will allow you to [accept and persist user data](#insert).

```bash
# Build with a remote connection

> astro build --remote

Reviewer 3: Isn't this repeating the previous section?

This has nothing to do with the section title of "Seed from your remote database"

Your development server will automatically restart your database whenever this file changes, regenerating your types and seeding your development data from `seed.ts`.

## Connect a libSQL database for production

Astro DB can connect to any libSQL server from any platform that exposes the libSQL remote protocol of the server, or can be self-hosted.

To connect Astro DB to a libSQL database, set the following environment variables:

- `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`: the connection URL to your libSQL server
- `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`: the auth token to your libSQL server

> The way you get these values varies between services, but the next paragraph will show you how can you get started with [Turso](https://turso.tech), a fully managed database platform that uses libSQL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The way you get these values varies between services, but the next section will show you how can you get started with [Turso](https://turso.tech), a fully managed libSQL database platform.
```

Reviewer 3: Should we point out that they created and maintain the libSQL server and protocol?

This sounds like any hosted Postgres platform, but it is more like recommending getting Redis from Redis Labs... It's literally their thing

### Getting started with Turso

> You can either use the CLI or the web interface to create and rethrieve the values we need.

Reviewer 3: Should we use the first person? I feel like second person is better for guides and first person is better for recipes, but maybe I'm crazy.
@sarah11918 is the best to save us here

```suggestion
You can either use the CLI or the web interface to create and retrieve the values you need.
```

Reviewer: I agree with Fryuni, `you` is better here. And this is the recommended form in [Writing and Style Guide](https://contribute.docs.astro.build/guides/writing-style/#writing-style) 😉 

> Do not use we, we’ll, us, let’s etc. (You are not with the reader.)

Reviewer 2: Haha, OF COURSE. We never use "we" unless it's "We (Astro) recommend". I was mostly copying/pasting/moving things around to restructure, so thank you for spotting!

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/af85025f-bf7d-4842-8c41-efa9a24dd375)

The steps that are shown below will walk you through the process of installing the Turso CLI, logging in (or signing up), creating a new database, getting the two values we need and pushing our schema to the remote database.

<Steps>

1. Install the [Turso CLI](https://docs.turso.tech/cli/installation).

> 2. [Login or signup](https://docs.turso.tech/cli/authentication) to Turso. For this example the username for the account will be Houston.

Reviewer 3: The username is not needed anywhere so I don't think that last bit is necessary.

It will appear as part of the URL, but that is an opaque value. Turso might as well give a random string or a hash, it doesn't change our guide here.
```suggestion
2. [Login or signup](https://docs.turso.tech/cli/authentication) to Turso.
```

> 3. Let's create a new database. In this case the database name is `andromeda`, but you can change it to any other name.

Reviewer 3: For step-by-step instructions I think we should stick with the imperative mood like the steps above.

```suggestion
3. Next, create a new database. In this example the database name is `andromeda`, but you can change it to any other name.
```

   ```sh "andromeda"
   turso db create andromeda
   ```

> 4. Now we are going to get the database URL of the newly created database.
> 
>    ```sh "andromeda"
>    turso db show andromeda
>    ```
> 
>     Use the value in the row `URL:` as the environment variable for `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`.
> 
>    ```env title=".env" "libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io"
>    ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
4. You can see the information about the newly created DB with the following command:

   ```sh "andromeda"
   turso db show andromeda
   ```

   Use the value from the row `URL:` as the environment variable `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`.

   ```env title=".env" "libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io"
   ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io
   ```
````

> 5. To get the second value that we need, let's create a bearer token to authenticate requests to the database.
> 
>    ```sh "andromeda"
>    turso db tokens create andromeda
>    ```
> 
>     Use the output of the command as the environment variable for `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`
> 
>    ```env title=".env" add={2} "eyJhbGciOiJF...3ahJpTkKDw"
>    ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io
>    ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN=eyJhbGciOiJF...3ahJpTkKDw
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
5. To authenticate requests to the database, create a new token for it:

   ```sh "andromeda"
   turso db tokens create andromeda
   ```

   Use the output of the command as the environment variable `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`

   ```env title=".env" add={2} "eyJhbGciOiJF...3ahJpTkKDw"
   ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io
   ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN=eyJhbGciOiJF...3ahJpTkKDw
   ```
````

6. Push your DB schema and metadata to the new Turso database.

   ```sh
   astro db push --remote
   ```

7. Congratulations, now you have a database connected! Give yourself a break.

   ```sh
   turso relax

>    ```

Reviewer 3: Nice touch 🤓 👾 (there is no Tetris emoji)

The `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL` environment variable configures the location of your database as well as other options like sync and encryption. 

#### URL scheme and host

libSQL supports both HTTP and WebSockets as the transport protocol for a remote server. It also supports using a local file or an in-memory DB. Those can be configured using the following URL schemes in the connection URL:

- `memory:` will use an in-memory DB. The host must be empty in this case.
- `file:` will use a local file. The host is the path to the file (`file:path/to/file.db`).
- `libsql:` will use a remote server through the protocol preferred by the library (this might be different across versions). The host is the address of the server (`libsql://your.server.io`).
- `http:` will use a remote server through HTTP. `https:` can be used to enable a secure connection. The host is the same as for `libsql:`.
- `ws:` will use a remote server through WebSockets. `wss:` can be used to enable a secure connection. The host is the same as for `libsql:`.

Details of the libSQL connection (e.g. encryption key, replication, sync interval) can be configured as query parameters in the remote connection URL.

> For example, to have a local file work as an embedded replica to an encrypted libSQL server, you can set the following environment variables:

Reviewer 3: The local file gets encrypted. Server encryption is configured on the server
```suggestion
For example, to have an encrypted local file work as an embedded replica to a libSQL server, you can set the following environment variables:
```

```

#### `syncInterval`

Interval between embedded replicas synchronizations in seconds. By default it only synchronizes on startup and after writes.

This property is only used when `syncUrl` is also set. For example, to set an in-memory embedded replica to synchronize every minute set the following environment variable:

```dotenv title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=memory:?syncUrl=libsql%3A%2F%2Fyour.server.io&syncInterval=60
```

### Self-hosted deployment

Set the `ASTRO_DATABASE_FILE` environment variable to a path pointing to your `.db` file within the host environment during your build:

```shell
ASTRO_DATABASE_FILE=/srv/files/database.db astro build
```

The build will statically compile with this path as your production database. When you deploy and launch your server it will connect to the file at this path on the production host.

Additionally, [pushing any table schema changes](#pushing-table-schemas) (also known as "schema migrations") must be managed manually using this environment variable.

:::danger
If you override your `.db` file on deployment, you will lose your production data. Follow the deployment method process for your host carefully to prevent data loss.

> :::

Reviewer 3: We can remove this section now. The `ASTRO_DATABASE_FILE` is kept for backward compatibility until Studio is completely shut down. You can just use `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=file:path/to/database.db`.

Using the `file:` remote URL also allows the user to use push the schema using `astro db push` as normal instead of requiring manual changes.

:::

#### `encryptionKey`

libSQL has native support for encrypted databases. Passing this search parameter will enable encryption using the given key:

```dotenv title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=file:path/to/file.db?encryptionKey=your-encryption-key
```

#### `syncUrl`

Embedded replicas are a feature of libSQL clients that enables a full synchronized copy of your database on a local file or in memory for ultra-fast reads. Writes are sent to a remote database defined on the `syncUrl` and synchronized with the local copy.

Use this property to pass a separate connection URL to turn the DB into an embedded replica of another database. This should only be used with the schemes `file:` and `memory:`. The parameter must be URL encoded.

For example, to have an in-memory embedded replica of a database on `libsql://your.server.io`, you can set the connection URL as such:

```dotenv title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=memory:?syncUrl=libsql%3A%2F%2Fyour.server.io
```

#### `syncInterval`

Interval between embedded replicas synchronizations in seconds. By default it only synchronizes on startup and after writes.

> This property is only used when `syncUrl` is also set. For example, to set an in-memory embedded replica to synchronize every minute set the following environment variable:

Author: i think for this we need someone more technical

> This property is only used when `syncUrl` is also set. For example, to set an in-memory embedded replica to synchronize every minute set the following environment variable:

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to worry! We've said don't use it without `syncUrl`! I'll have to look at it in context when I review the whole thing, but maybe this will make more sense to bring that info earlier like:

> The interval used by `syncUrl` ....

I'll see how it feels when I get there!

Your development server will automatically restart your database whenever this file changes, regenerating your types and seeding your development data from `seed.ts`.

## Connect a libSQL database for production

Astro DB can connect to any local libSQL database or to any server that exposes the libSQL remote protocol, whether managed or self-hosted.

To connect Astro DB to a libSQL database, set the following environment variables:

- `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`: the connection URL to your libSQL DB
- `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`: the auth token to your libSQL server. This is required for remote databases, not needed for local DBs like files or in-memory databases

The way you get these values varies between services, but the next section will show you how you can get started with [Turso](https://turso.tech).

Turso is the company behind [libSQL](https://github.com/tursodatabase/libsql), the open-source fork of SQLite that powers Astro DB. They created and maintain the libSQL project, making them the perfect choice to provide a fully managed libSQL database platform.

### Getting started with Turso

You can either use the CLI or the web interface to create and retrieve the values you need.

> The steps that are shown below will walk you through the process of installing the Turso CLI, logging in (or signing up), creating a new database, getting the two values we need and pushing our schema to the remote database.

Reviewer: We should avoid `we`/`our` while guiding the user. I also slightly reworded the sentence:
```suggestion
The steps below will guide you through the process of installing the Turso CLI, logging in (or signing up), creating a new database, obtaining the two necessary values, and pushing the schema to the remote database.
```
I even wonder if we really need to specify the step concerning obtaining the values:

```suggestion
The steps below will guide you through the process of installing the Turso CLI, logging in (or signing up), creating a new database, and pushing the schema to the remote database.
```
I think it is better to inform about important steps not the intermediaries.

Author: I often use "we" without a specific reason, and Sarah even added an image for this lol.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/90fd03e0-cfbe-4390-b510-f7d84c304122)

My thought on outlining the steps is that if someone wishes to use the website, they can follow the process. Although it's much simpler with the CLI, and obtaining a token via the website requires navigating through submenus, etc., I believe we should still communicate the steps to inform users of what to expect.

I do think we need more people to weigh in on this.

   ```sh "andromeda"
   turso db show andromeda
   ```

   Use the value from the row `URL:` as the environment variable `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`.
   
   :::tip
   To read more about .env files and environment variables, check out the [Using environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) guide.
   :::

   ```env title=".env" "libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io"
   ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io
   ```

5. To authenticate requests to the database, create a new token for it:

   ```sh "andromeda"
   turso db tokens create andromeda
   ```

   Use the output of the command as the environment variable `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`

   ```env title=".env" add={2} "eyJhbGciOiJF...3ahJpTkKDw"
   ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=libsql://andromeda-houston.turso.io
   ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN=eyJhbGciOiJF...3ahJpTkKDw
   ```

6. Push your DB schema and metadata to the new Turso database.

   ```sh
   astro db push --remote
   ```

7. Congratulations, now you have a database connected! Give yourself a break. 👾

   ```sh
   turso relax
   ```

</Steps>

To explore more features of Turso, check out the [Turso docs](https://docs.turso.tech).

> This was a quick guide on how to get started with Turso, read on to learn more on how to use Astro DB.
> 

Reviewer: While I understand the intent, I'm not sure this sentence fits in with the rest of the documentation. I think that by deleting it it doesn't take anything away from the documentation and those who get there see clearly that the documentation continues.

```suggestion
```

### Connecting to remote databases

Astro DB allows you to connect to both local and remote databases. By default, Astro uses a local database file for `dev` and `build` commands, recreating tables and inserting development seed data each time.

To connect to a hosted remote database, use the `--remote` flag. This flag enables both readable and writable access to your remote database, allowing you to [accept and persist user data](#insert) in production environments.

:::note

> While remote connections are generally possible with any deployment platform using static or server rendering mode, there are currently some limitations. Non-Node runtimes like Cloudflare and Deno don't currently support DB on server-rendered routes when using libSQL. Support for these platforms is planned for future implementation and the progress can be tracked by viewing [this PR](https://github.com/withastro/astro/pull/12163).

Reviewer: Although I am in favor of adding a temporary aside until the implementation is finished (to reduce pressure on Fryuni 😄 ), I don't know if we should put a link to the PR. Perhaps we could cut the sentence after "for future implementation".

Author: something like this?

```suggestion
While remote connections are generally possible with any deployment platform using static or server rendering mode, there are currently some limitations. Non-Node runtimes like Cloudflare and Deno don't currently support DB on server-rendered routes when using libSQL. Support for these platforms is planned for future implementation.
```

</ReadMore>

## TODO: removed Astro Studio

TODO: extrapolate some usefull commands that are not exclusive to Studio and put them here.

> the libSQL portion below is usefull, but some commands to do basic stuff are needed.

Author: true. I will try to rewrite the entire thing, its better to have a unique section.

import { db, Comment } from 'astro:db';

if (Astro.request.method === 'POST') {
  // Parse form data
  const formData = await Astro.request.formData();
  const author = formData.get('author');

>   const content = formData.get('content');

Reviewer 4: The rest of the page uses `body` for the comments while these few examples use `content`

I suggest making everything uniform

```suggestion
  const body = formData.get('body');
```

  if (typeof author === 'string' && typeof content === 'string') {
    // Insert form data into the Comment table

>     await db.insert(Comment).values({ author, content });

Reviewer 4: The rest of the page uses `body` for the comments while these few examples use `content`

I suggest making everything uniform

```suggestion
    await db.insert(Comment).values({ author, body });
```

  }
}

// Render the new list of comments on each request
const comments = await db.select().from(Comment);
---

> 

Reviewer 4: The rest of the page uses body for the comments while these few examples use content

I suggest making everything uniform

```suggestion
<label for="body">Body</label>
<textarea id="body" name="body"></textarea>
```

}
```

The [Actions feature](/en/guides/actions/) provides a more straightforward approach for inserting data into Astro DB. Here's an example of how to perform a database insert using Actions:

```ts
// src/actions/index.ts
import { db, Comment } from 'astro:db';
import { defineAction } from 'astro:actions';
import { z } from 'astro:schema';

export const server = {
  addComment: defineAction({
    // Actions include type safety with Zod, removing the need
    // to check if typeof {value} === 'string' in your pages
    input: z.object({
      author: z.string(),

>       content: z.string(),

Reviewer 4: The rest of the page uses body for the comments while these few examples use content

I suggest making everything uniform

```suggestion
      body: z.string(),
```

}
```

> The Actions feature provides a more straightforward approach for inserting data into Astro DB. Here's an example of how to perform a database insert using Actions:

Reviewer: Perhaps we could add a link here for those who haven't heard of Actions yet?
```suggestion
The [Actions feature](/en/guides/actions/) provides a more straightforward approach for inserting data into Astro DB. Here's an example of how to perform a database insert using Actions:
```

```ts
// src/actions/index.ts
import { db, Comment } from 'astro:db';
import { defineAction } from 'astro:actions';
import { z } from 'astro:schema';

export const server = {
  addComment: defineAction({
    // Actions include type safety with Zod, removing the need
    // to check if typeof {value} === 'string' in your pages
    input: z.object({
      author: z.string(),
      content: z.string(),
    }),
    handler: async (input) => {
      const updatedComments = await db
        .insert(Comment)
        .values(input)
        .returning(); // Return the updated comments
      return updatedComments;
    },
  }),
};

> ```

Reviewer 5: Did you get a chance to confirm this example works? @JusticeMatthew mentioned it was probably worth double checking since he hasn't been using Actions for very long.

Author: Honestly, no, but I can check right now. I intended to write a brief message about what has changed and what needs to be looked at, but I got sidetracked with other tasks.

Author: it works!
https://stackblitz.com/edit/github-qteuef (everything else apart from the action is done by bold.new. its pretty good!)

## Self-hosted production deployment

If you deploy your site to a self-managed host such as a [virtual private server](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_server), you can choose to use a database file.

:::caution
Using a database file is an advanced feature, and care should be taken when deploying to prevent overriding your database and losing your production data.

> Additionally, this method will not work in serverless deployments, as the file system is not persisted in those environments.

Author: 👍
